Behold oppsett med dødelighet,

Beregn med alle metoder
upstream, lwendrof, posmet og minlim
(lag felles plott)
(gidder ikke dette, lag metodene klar som kommentarer,
bruk minlim)



Beregn stasjonære fordeling, sammenlign (går ikke)

Ta  deretter og følg alle gytt en dag

---------------------------------------------------

Tekst:

Example 8 .....

This example illustrate the use of the production/loss terms.
The main script runex8 uses the same input data as the
previous two examples. Also the same spatial resolution is used.

An arbitrary continuous spawning rate of 1 egg/m^3/day is used
for the lower 100 m. The background egg mortality is set to m1 = 10%/day.
Near the neutral level, the mortality is increased to m2 = 50%/day
to account for hatching. These percentages are set more or less
arbitrarly for the sake of this example.

The model may be run in two modes. In mode 1 (the default), the total
egg distribution is considered converging to a steady state. In mode
2, the egg production is terminated after 24 hours, making it possible
to modell the vertical distribution of eggs from one day as they
become older.

The model setup present some numerical problems. As expected, the
upstream method gives too low maximum concentration. Although stable,
the Lax Wendroff method produces negative concentrations.  The posmet
method performs better, but small oscillations are produced.  As a
result of these problems the minlim method was added to the toolbox
and is the default method in runex8. The other methods may easily be
tested by modification of the script.

By default runex8 runs the model in mode 1 for 30 days, starting
with no eggs. Figure ... shows the distribution after at 20 days,
close to the steady state. From near zero at near 600 m the
concentration increases lineraly to a local maximum close to 500 m.
Because of the egg mortality the concentration decreases slowly to
a local minimum above 300 m. Thereafter the egg concentration raises
to a peek at the neutral level of 125--130 m before decreasing steeply
to zero.

***Plott

Figur ... Modelled egg distribution after 20 days, 

Issuing the command
    mode = 2 
sets the model runex8 in mode 2. This makes it possible
to follow the development of the egg distribution from one day.
Figrue ... shows the distributions of eggs at different
ages. Equivalently it can be viewed as the position of eggs spawned
during one day after 24, hours. (--- skriv bedre ---) As the eggs grow
older, the concentration ascends, decreases by mortality and get
smoother. At the neutral level they make a narrow peak concentration
before the concentration decreases rapidly by hatching.



***Plott


Figur ... Modelled distribution of eggs at different age
0--1 days, 3--4 days, 6--7 days, 

The number of eggs at age is calculated and plotted by the command
sequence

  Y = ve_int(X);
  plot(Y)

An elaboration of this sequence produces figure ...
The first 5 days the number of eggs are reduced by the mortality
rate m1. After a short transition period the loss stabilizes
at the higher rate m2 after 6 days.



Figur ... Vertical integrated number of eggs as function of age


The script animex8 can be used to animate the results of the
simulations from runex8 in both modes.

